Improved env var docs a bit. (#1913)
wasp-lang/wasp: web/docs/project/env-vars.md

For instance, _during development_, you may want your project to connect to a local development database running on your machine, but _in production_, you may prefer it to connect to the production database. Similarly, in development, you may want to use a test Stripe account, while in production, your app should use a real Stripe account.

> While some env vars are required by Wasp, such as the database connection or secrets for social auth, you can also define your env vars for any other useful purposes, and then access them in the code.

Reviewer: Let's use this chance to get rid of the passive form.
Also, the sentence is a little long and can be broken down into simpler sentences:
```suggestion
Wasp requires you to set certain env vars (e.g., the database connection string, the secrets for social auth).
You can also set your env vars with anything you might need to access from the code (e.g., list some examples for this)
```

Author: I get that we don't like passive, but you also removed the "while", therefore changing the flow of the sentence for the worse in my opinion. Also, there might be some other purpose for providing env vars than for accessing them in the code, so you narrowed that down too much.

I wouldn't try to fix the current documentation at this moment, let's do that in another PR if you wish. This is 3 months old PR with relatively small additions, that was created to quickly address the issue user -> we can merge that and get that value, while avoiding the discussion that will now arise from additional trying to improve the docs near by it.

In Wasp, you can use environment variables in both the client and the server code.
## Client Env Vars

> Client environment variables are embedded into the client code during the build and shipping process, making them public and readable by anyone. Therefore, you should **never store secrets in them** (such as secret API keys -> you can provide those to server instead).

Reviewer: Let's also get rid of the passive form (are embedded -> Wasp embeds).

I'm not a fan of using parentheses and an arrow here - it's a little weird, and I feel it could be it's own sentence:
```
For example, you shouldn't provide your API keys as client env vars. Instead, set them on the server.
```
Btw, I'm not sure this makes sense. The API keys will still be visible by anyone who accesses the web page (not storing them in the env file will just prevent them from getting into version control).

Author: Same as I said above, I would not try to improve the whole pieces of docs here in this PR, but would just focus on adding neccessary bits that I thoguht are important based on the user's experience. We can make a separate effort of improving the docs flow and sentencing, we will have better results if we do it as a whole, then if we attack only random bits that were touched in this PR, missing context.

I don't see much improvement with the sentence you provided. Also, you dropped word "secret", which is crucial -> they can provide public API keys.

I don't get what doesn't make sense to you? We are not mentioning env files at all here, how did you get to those?

Reviewer: > We can make a separate effort of improving the docs flow and sentencing, we will have better results if we do it as a whole, then if we attack only random bits that were touched in this PR, missing context.

Ok, makes sense.

> I don't get what doesn't make sense to you?

I get it know, you're talking about some data that the client doesn't need at all (it's only required by the server). But why would they then pass it to the client in the first place if the client doesn't need them?

Author: So it is actually a quite common question/mistake we get in Discord: I have let's say Sendgrid API secret, can I put it in the client? So I don't have to bother with the server. I think you know quite a bit about it so it seems this is obvious, but you would be surprised.

Aha you say that client doesn't need them -> if they decide to use some third party service, let's say S3, it is their choice how to impelemnt it in Wasp, and they might easily try to do it all in client. With our features it is clear where env var goes, but if they are doing it alone like this, then they can more easily make a mistake.

> To enable Wasp to pick them up, client env vars must be prefixed with `REACT_APP_`, for example: `REACT_APP_SOME_VAR_NAME=...`.

Reviewer: Why tho? :smile: 

You probably did it because you feel that `env vars` has become such a universal acronym that it's reached a point where it's more recognizable than the full name. I disagree, but fair enough.

I don't have a strong preference either way.

Still, we should then probably update all occurrences in the text to be consistent.

Author: Can't remember exactly, I think I felt "environemnt variables" was a mouthful here and this was in the part of docs where the naming "env vars" was already established, so kind of as you said.

We could update all the occurences, but they will again diverge at some point, since we don't have an automatic mechanism to check it or enforce it. So I wouldn't bother with it.

Check below on how to define them.

## Server Env Vars

In server environment variables, you can store secret values (e.g. secret API keys) since they are not publicly readable. You can define them without any special prefix, such as `SOME_VAR_NAME=...`.

> You can read them from the server code like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read the env vars from server code like this:
```

### 2. Using Shell
If you set environment variables in the shell where you run your Wasp commands (e.g., `wasp start`), Wasp will recognize them.

> You can set environment variables in the `.profile` or a similar file, which will set them permanently, or you can set them temporarily by defining them at the start of a command (`SOME_VAR_NAME=SOMEVALUE wasp start`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One option is setting your environment variables in `.profile` or a similar file, which will set them permanently,.
Another option is setting your environment variables temporarily by defining them at the start of a command (e.g., `SOME_VAR_NAME=SOMEVALUE wasp start`).
```

Author: How is that better? Didn't you just go passive, while it is better to speak directly to the user?

Reviewer: "One option is setting" isn't passive form. It's an active sentence with a different subject.

I believe the whole thing is better because:
- The two sentences are shorter and simpler than the original longer sentence.
- The two sentences follow the same structure, contrasting the differences.
- The subjects of the two sentences also emphasize the two possibilities ("one option is", "another option is"). It's always best to use the most relevant actor in the sentence as the subject. In this case, that's "the way of setting environment variables"

Btw, I'm not hung up on every word I suggest in these changes. I just add them as examples (maybe I shouldn't be using the suggestion box). You can pick and apply what you think makes sense.

The core idea I care about here is shorter and simpler sentences. The rest of the stuff is just how I'd approach the core idea, but is not set in stone.

P.S. whatever you choose to do with this, there's an extra "the" before ".profile" you should remove. It may have slipped unnoticed.

Author: This is what I find tricky with these docs discussion: you say it sounds better to you, but to me original sounds better. I can read it in one piece with clear contract, versus (to me) unnatural break you went for in order to emphasize it is two options. And again it goes against the recommendation to talk to them directly, which you use as a quite strong argument in different places, but now you drop that.

Seems to me like for most of the way docs are written one can go and make a counter arugment: either splitting something, or combining something, or swtiching to "you", or switching away form it, all for the argument of "it is simpler / reads better this way", while it is really quite subjective and probalby has 0 impact on the total mass of readers who are also all unique people.

I don't think we shouldn't comment on docs in PRs at all, we should, and there are things in writing guide we should be looking to enforce indeed, but I think there is a line here, in the sense that if a suggestion is not clearly an objective improvement, it is probably better not make one. Or while making it, say very clearly it is just an alternative idea and author can do whatever they like, so they can take a look at it, take what they lilke, and move on, wihtout having to discuss it.

Reviewer: I agree with the core idea behind your comment: _Everyone can choose their style, and we should emphasize when which suggestions are subjective alternatives._

So I'll keep that in mind for the future.

I do have one thing to clear up.

This part here:

> And again it goes against the recommendation to talk to them directly, which you use as a quite strong argument in different places, but now you drop that.

Isn't right. 

To avoid future confusion, I'll elaborate on "addressing the user directly" (and we can change the style guide to communicate it more clearly).

_Addressing the user directly_ means _write as if you were speaking to someone_, for example:
- "You can" instead of "We can."
- "Do this" instead of "Let's do this."
- "You can" instead of "The user can."
- "You should add a query" instead of "A query should be added." 

_Addressing the user directly_ doesn't mean _You must write every sentence in the second person, and every subject must be "you" (the user)._
That would be very impractical. Imagine if you were talking to me with the constraint that every sentence must start with "You." It's perfectly normal to use subjects that aren't the person you're speaking to (and we do it all the time, as we should).

So, the change I suggested here doesn't at all contradict the recommendation of addressing the user directly.

Anyway, here's what the writing guide currently says:
> **Address the reader directly.** Instead of "We can implement a Query..." or "A Query can be implemented..." or "The user can implement a Query...", say "You can implement a Query..." The docs should speak to the reader and address them directly to avoid possible confusion (e.g., Who are we? The Wasp team? The reader together with the Wasp team? etc.). Use the word user only to refer to the user of the software that your reader is developing. You can sometimes use first-person plural pronouns to refer to the organization (Wasp). For example, "We support both TypeScript and JavaScript" is OK, but "Wasp supports both TypeScript and JavaScript" is usually better.

How do you think we can improve it to make it less confusing?

Author: I get the idea, but based on this, to me it sounds like we should do "You can do thing X" instead of "One option is to do thing X". Shorter, speaks direct to the user. As writing guide suggests as the best way to phrase stuff. Would you make it longer + loose the direct talking to the user?

This is not specific to Wasp and is simply how environment variables can be set in the shell.

> Defining environment variables in this way can be cumbersome even for a single project and even more challenging to manage if you have multiple Wasp projects. Therefore, we do not recommend this as a default method for providing environment variables to Wasp projects during development, you should use .env files instead. However, it can be useful for occasionally **overriding** specific environment variables because environment variables set this way **take precedence over those defined in `.env` files**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Defining environment variables inline can be cumbersome even for a single project and even more challenging to manage if you have multiple Wasp projects.
Therefore, we do not recommend this as a default method for providing environment variables to Wasp projects during development. Instead, use the `.env` files instead.
Inline definitions are useful for occasionally **overriding** specific environment variables because environment variables set this way **take precedence over those defined in `.env` files** (list example perhaps?)
```

Author: While "in this way" refers to the context above, which is not ideal, what you did with "inline" is likely worse, as it is a new concept we haven't mentioned so far and you haven't explained it here, so it is not clear to what you are referring.

But similar like above, I wouldn't go into refactoring the whole paragraphs here when we just added one small piece of the sentence, let's leave that for another PR.

## Defining Env Vars in Production

> While in development, we had the option of using `.env` files which made it easy to define and manage env vars. However, in production, when our code is built and deployed, we need to provide env vars differently.

Reviewer: We should change "we" to "you" to address the user directly.

Author: Let's do it for the whole docuemnt then in another PR.

![Env vars usage in development and production](/img/env/prod_dev_fade_2.svg)

### Client Env Vars

> Client env vars are embedded into the client code during the build process, making them public and readable by anyone. Therefore, you should **never store secrets in them** (such as secret API keys).

Reviewer: Again, the API key is I believe an incorrect example (as it's visible by anyone once the site is deployed).

Author: I don't get what you mean. We are telling them they shouldn't provide secrets as clienv env vars, specifically taking an example of secret API keys. I am not sure how that refers to what you said.

Reviewer: I'm resolving this because the same discussion is happening somewhere else.

You should provide them to the build command that turns client code into static files:
```shell
REACT_APP_SOME_VAR_NAME=somevalue REACT_APP_SOME_OTHER_VAR_NAME=someothervalue npm run build
```

> Notice that the exact moment when you should provide these env vars is during the `npm run build` command that you execute from `.wasp/build/web-app/` after you have ran `wasp build`. Check [deployment docs](../advanced/deployment/manually#3-deploying-the-web-client-frontend) for more details.

Reviewer: I find the first sentence a little too long (many filler words). Can you simplify it somehow? 

Also, the deployment docs are missing a "the." I see that Grammarly is bad at catching missing articles before links because of the bracket - something to keep in mind.

Author: I dropeed the first part, might not be that important! Can't remember exactly since it was some time since I wrote this, but if it will be missing we can add it again. I added missing "the".

> Also, notice that you can't and shouldn't provide env vars to the client code by setting them on the hosting provider where you deployed them (unlike server env vars, where this is how we do it). Your client code will ignore those, as at that point client code is just static files.

Reviewer: All these explanations are great and understandable, but I'm wondering if maybe we're explaining too much.

People should already probably know this stuff if they're deploying a web app.

Author: It's what confused multiple people in Discord, and I myself wasn't 100% sure about the process, so I would love if I have had this in the docs. There is a big difference between writing an app and deploying it, those are different knowledge sets although related, plus Wasp makes a lot of things easier, allowing even beginners to implement their apps, so we can expect some of them don't have a lot of experience in deploying them. Also, Fly for example offers place to set env vars for the client server, so that allows for extra confusion.

Reviewer: Makes sense, I'm probably forgetting my past struggles with this stuff.

You can resolve when you see this.

:::info How it works
What happens behind the scenes is that Wasp will replace all occurrences of `import.meta.env.REACT_APP_SOME_VAR_NAME` in your client code with the env var value you provided. This is done during the build process, so the value is embedded into the static files produced from the client code.

Read more about it in Vite's [docs](https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html#production-replacement).
:::

### Server Env Vars

> To provide env vars to your server code in production you will need to have them defined and available on the server where your server code is running.

Reviewer: Can we change this to the present tense?

Author: Done!

> Setting this up will highly depend on where you are deploying your Wasp project, but in general it comes down to defining the env vars via mechanisms that your hosting provider provides.

Reviewer: I recommend splitting into two sentences.

Author: Why is that? Reads better to me like this.

Reviewer: I had to read it multiple times to realize what's going on.

I don't know what reads better (because I'm not sure what exactly you're comparing it to), I just know I found this particular form to complex for my taste.

But, even for the simplest change (change "but" to a full stop"), I think it's an improvement:
```
Setting this up will highly depend on where you are deploying your Wasp project.
In general, it comes down to defining the env vars via mechanisms that your hosting provider provides.
```
I believe simpler and shorter sentences are almost always easier to read (since they give you a "checkpoint"). This is especially true for non-native speakers.
